Feature: Optimize ZFS instance creation with image variants (#17630)
canonical/lxd: doc/reference/storage_zfs_internals.md

> (storage-zfs-internals)=

Reviewer: Please add a meta description:

```suggestion
---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: <your summary of the page here for search engines to display in search results, up to 150 chars>
---
 
(storage-zfs-internals)=
```

# ZFS storage driver internals

> This page describes implementation details of the ZFS storage driver that are not required for day-to-day use but are useful for understanding its behaviour or for debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes implementation details of the ZFS storage driver that are not required for day-to-day use but are useful for understanding its behavior or for debugging.
```

US English spelling :)

## Image variant datasets

When LXD unpacks an image on a ZFS pool, it stores the result as an *image variant* dataset.
The dataset naming convention is:

- `<pool>/images/<fingerprint>` : dataset variant (when {config:option}`storage-zfs-volume-conf:zfs.block_mode` is `false`)
- `<pool>/images/<fingerprint>_<filesystem>` : block-backed variant, where `<filesystem>` is `ext4`, `btrfs`, or `xfs` (when {config:option}`storage-zfs-volume-conf:zfs.block_mode` is `true`)

Each variant dataset has a `@readonly` ZFS snapshot.
When a new instance is created from the image, LXD clones this `@readonly` snapshot rather than unpacking the image again, making instance creation nearly instantaneous.

## Soft deletion

When an image is deleted but one or more instances are still cloned from a variant dataset, LXD cannot immediately destroy the dataset (ZFS does not allow destroying a dataset that has dependent clones).

> Instead, the variant is renamed to `<pool>/deleted/images/<fingerprint>` (or `<pool>/deleted/images/<fingerprint>_<filesystem>` for block-backed variants), this is referred to as *soft deletion*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, the variant is renamed to `<pool>/deleted/images/<fingerprint>` (or `<pool>/deleted/images/<fingerprint>_<filesystem>` for block-backed variants). This is referred to as *soft deletion*.
```

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Internal implementation details of the LXD ZFS storage driver, including image variant datasets and soft deletion.
---

(storage-zfs-internals)=
# ZFS storage driver internals

This page describes implementation details of the ZFS storage driver that are not required for day-to-day use but are useful for understanding its behavior or for debugging.

## Image variant datasets

When LXD unpacks an image on a ZFS pool, it stores the result as an *image variant* dataset.
The dataset naming convention is:

- `<pool>/images/<fingerprint>` : dataset variant (when {config:option}`storage-zfs-volume-conf:zfs.block_mode` is `false`)
- `<pool>/images/<fingerprint>_<filesystem>` : block-backed variant, where `<filesystem>` is `ext4`, `btrfs`, or `xfs` (when {config:option}`storage-zfs-volume-conf:zfs.block_mode` is `true`)

Each variant dataset has a `@readonly` ZFS snapshot.

> When a new instance is created from the image, LXD clones this `@readonly` snapshot rather than unpacking the image again, making instance creation nearly instantaneous.

Reviewer 2: Avoid hyperbolic language:

```suggestion
When a new instance is created from the image, LXD clones this `@readonly` snapshot rather than unpacking the image again, which speeds up instance creation.
```

## Soft deletion

> When an image is deleted but one or more instances are still cloned from a variant dataset, LXD cannot immediately destroy the dataset (ZFS does not allow destroying a dataset that has dependent clones).

Reviewer 2: You can probably make the cause and effect clear, rather than using parentheses. Also, we can minimize gerunds with a minor change:

```suggestion
When an image is deleted but one or more instances are still cloned from a variant dataset, LXD cannot immediately destroy the dataset because ZFS does not allow a dataset with dependent clones to be destroyed.
```
